# Google Summer of Code 2021

This is a list of project ideas for students applying to the Google Summer
of Code program in 2021 (GSoC 2021).

It's only an indicative list, and is subject to change as Godot is very
actively developed by hundreds of contributors. Use this list as an
inspiration source, but feel free to come with your own ideas on what you
would like to work on in Godot.

As a complement, you can check out the [community proposals repository](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-proposals)
and fish out some good ideas for projects. You can also engage the discussions over there.

Make sure to discuss your ideas with Godot developers on the [Godot Contributors chat platform](https://chat.godotengine.org),
so that we can help you refine your ideas and ensure that they fit in the Godot roadmap and architecture.

## Reimplement Godot's theme editor

**Skills:** C++, (potentially) GDScript

Godot's theming system is very simple—it is still a game engine ;)—Styleboxes are assigned to different states of Control-Nodes. There is no cascading and no shared variables. This makes it very easy to understand, and results in very little complexity. But also comes with a cost. Setting up themes is super tedious. For example, a color change requires you to update hundreds of values.

The goal of this project is to design a theme editor, which will generate a theme with systems, like a color palette, so that we get the best of both worlds. The simplicity of Godot's theming and an advanced theming structure when setting up a theme using the theme editor. There is a big amount of freedom and space for creative ideas to make creating themes a pleasure, while still keeping the core architecture as simple as possible. Also, making the editor itself easier to interact with, such as showing the possible classes from clicks on the elements on the preview instead of only providing a list.

Another related task is to improve some aspects of the editor theme, such as caching icons for faster startup time, color icons with modulation (looks better on light theme, no re-render of icons when changing from dark to light), and more.

## Automatic arrangement nodes in GraphEdit (VisualScript, VisualShader)

**Skills:** C++

The idea is to add functionality to the graph edit system that will automatically rearrange the nodes, dividing them into layers and blocks, making them comprehensive and easy to read. This functionality can be used in Visual Script Editor and Visual Shader Editor (as they also use graph edit system) to automatically reorganize the nodes. The feature will also handle the cases when the grid is turned on/off or when its scaling is changed.

See the related proposal for more information:

- https://github.com/godotengine/godot-proposals/issues/1253

## Add a command palette to quickly perform operations listed in the editor menus

**Skills:** C++

A command palette can be integrated to perform actions listed in various editor menus. These could be registered automatically by the command palette somehow (or the other way around; editor menus will signal their presence to the command palette).

There should be a keyboard shortcut defined by default as well. Since we already use <kbd>Space</kbd> for other purposes in Godot, I think something like <kbd>Ctrl + Shift + P</kbd> (<kbd>Cmd + Shift + P</kbd> on macOS) could make sense. This is the same shortcut as Visual Studio Code uses for its command palette.

See the related proposal for more information:

- https://github.com/godotengine/godot-proposals/issues/1444

## Move VehicleBody to an addon

**Skills:** C++, Physics

The VehicleBody node is a legacy feature that unfortunately has not gotten support for a while. Since Godot aims to be very lean and only provide the most used features out-of-the-box, we plan to move some of the code to external (official) addons so only people who really needs the feature have it on their project, reducing the burden (especially in engine size) for those who don't need it.

This project would entail in removing the node and re-creating its functionality in and addon powered by GDNative, which would allow it to still have good performance while being distributed out of the engine. This would be a good opportunity to also solve the outstanding issues with the feature, potentially by using new modern physics algorithms instead of relying on the old code.

## Add pseudo-localization to better spot untranslated strings and unexpected layout changes caused by long strings

**Skills:** C++

When you internationalize your project, it might be difficult to see how it will fare with different localizations, especially during development when translations are not made yet. You might face a few problems to test it:

- When running your project, there's no way to immediately see which strings are translatable and which ones aren't. You have to fully translate the project to a language before you can detect non-translatable strings.
- Unexpected layout changes can also occur when translators use strings that are too long to fit in existing buttons/labels.
- Moreover, if you're translating to a language which only uses a Latin-1 character set, it might be difficult to notice that your font doesn't support the full character set required to support some languages out there. This may be a problem if you plan to localize to more languages in the future.

This project consists in implementing a pseudo-localization by changing the original strings to use a larger set of characters and make them bigger so you can see if the layout can adapt properly.

See the related proposal for more information:

- https://github.com/godotengine/godot-proposals/issues/1844
